 
CONCURSO PÚBLICO DE ADMISSÃO À CARREIRA DE 
DIPLOMATA 
DIPLOMATA (TERCEIRO SECRETÁRIO) 
Prova Escrita de Língua Inglesa – Redação 
Aplicação: 26/4/2026 
PADRÃO DE RESPOSTA DEFINITIVO 
 
 
Candidates should write an a coherent essay that explores the multifaceted nature of health diplomacy. The essay should 
start by introducing the notion of health diplomacy and defining describing it as a multidisciplinary area concerned with obvious 
issues such as health threats and disease control but also with food security and access to medicine in areas devastated by poverty, 
natural disasters or war. In this sense, candidates may relate health to the diplomatic functions of representation and negotiation 
inter alia. 
 
They should situate the discussion in a historical perspective highlighting decisive moments in history when health 
issues pervaded international relations. They could mention, for example, the creation of the World Health Organization, the 
international cooperation against the covid pandemics, or the fight against infectious diseases in the 19th century (the birth of 
international health diplomacy), and other cases of international health crisis as well as the role of regional institutions such as 
the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), and other international organizations and facts relevant to the history of health 
diplomacy. 
 
Candidates should discuss how the issue of health is closely connected to human rights and to notions such as justice, 
equity and economic development, as well as poverty and political subordination in international level. They should also link 
health diplomacy to humanitarian crises such as those caused by forced migration. Considering health as a dimension of equality 
and social justice, candidates may discuss how heath diplomacy may be an instrument in reducing the asymmetry between the 
Global North and the Global South.   
Candidates may additionally refer to contemporary initiatives such as BRICS health diplomacy. In this sense, candidates 
may give examples of international cooperation and address the interdependence among nations concerning health issues and 
their economic impact. They may also include a topic on the relevance of the Brazilian universal health system (Sistema Único 
de Saúde) as an example of how health diplomacy may be inspired and influenced by national institutions and solutions and how 
it is connected to external public policies. 
 
The essay may address the role played by interstate organizations like the World Health Organization, or humanitarian 
organizations such as Doctors Without Borders, for example. Candidates may discuss how humanitarian international law relates 
to health diplomacy and may also use part of their texts to relate health diplomacy to international negotiations concerning 
medicine patent breaking, vaccines supply chains, and the establishments of environmental goals, among other possible issues.  
They may also address the importance of border control measures in the context of health diplomacy, including 
quarantine practices, vaccination and sanitary surveillance at points of entry, as historically adopted by states to contain the 
spread of infectious diseases, and in this regard, they may mention the Covid-19 pandemic and how it led to international 
cooperation in health-related measures.  
Candidates may also address how health issues are intertwined with economic and manufacturing strategies in an 
international level. In this regard, they may write on how epidemics and pandemics can affect global supply chains and impact 
economy and finance worldwide. They may also discuss how Sanitary and Phytosanitary provisions in trade agreements can 
guarantee food safety and can be as part of a series of measures promoting international health. 
Another topic that may be explored within the text is worrying situation concerning the international health scenario 
due to recent funding cuts to international programs and organizations. Candidates may provide examples and refer to specific 
areas of concern. 
 
Candidates should write their texts emphasizing the relevance of health diplomacy in its multiple fronts, including its 
geopolitical dimension, and argue that it should be a priority in international policy. In this sense, they may mention different 
aspects (some of which have already been indicated here), establishing a relation between a country’s role in the international 
arena and its participation in the discussion and the decisions in the field of health. Different approaches to the topic may be 
considered, provides they remain consistent with the proposed theme. 
 
Candidates may provide different examples for each aspect addressed in their texts, mentioning different international 
agreements, conventions and organizations.  
 
 

CONCURSO PÚBLICO DE ADMISSÃO À CARREIRA DE 
DIPLOMATA 
DIPLOMATA (TERCEIRO SECRETÁRIO) 
Prova Escrita de Língua Inglesa – Versão 
Aplicação: 26/4/2026 
PADRÃO DE RESPOSTA DEFINITIVO 
 
Over the past decade, the so-called artificial intelligence (AI) has undergone a rapid process of development. This 
process is attributable not only to fundamental scientific advances in AI techniques but, above all, to the concentration of the 
technology industry, which has dedicated itself to engineering the best algorithms for its purposes. These algorithms were 
made possible by the increase in computing power and network capacity, and by the ability to collect and store vast quantities 
of data, thereby enabling the use of increasingly large volumes of data. 
Not without reason, recent discussions concerning the applications of AI have focused on the need for a legal 
definition of its boundaries. In this context, there coexist, on the one hand, an understandable concern that state intervention 
may undermine the potential for the expansion of technological innovation, and, on the other hand, an uncertainty arising from 
the absence (or insufficiency) of digital regulation. This, in addition to inhibiting investment in the field, threatens the State’s 
commitment to promote and protect fundamental rights. 
Some examples illustrate the magnitude of the problem at hand. 
In multilateral discussions, Brazil has voiced concerns about the possibility of integrating artificial intelligence into 
nuclear command, control, and communications systems (NC3), as well as about reports that AI-assisted computer systems are 
capable of developing new toxic chemical compounds within hours and of designing novel pathogenic agents. 
The impacts of AI use on the labor market are equally significant, and the risks are diverse. While the United Nations 
sustainable development goal 8 calls for the promotion of full and productive employment for all, the adoption of AI for work 
automation, alongside increased production and profit, brings the dangers of discrimination, for example in the automated 
screening of CVs. 
 
Moreover, this technology reshapes the traditional division of labor by enabling production processes for goods and 
services to take place outside of any conventional production environment. Many of the dynamics of socialization, 
organization, and coordination of production and labor are shifting to virtual spaces. Vast volumes of data are extracted, 
ultimately resulting in the improper processing of workers’ personal and sensitive data within a system of pervasive 
surveillance. This also leads to the fragmentation of the production process for goods or services into microtasks, which are 
then coordinated through algorithmic management. 
A recent report by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) suggests that nearly 40% of jobs worldwide will be 
affected by generative AI technologies, posing major challenges as certain occupations will be displaced, the demand for labor 
will decline, and wages will be impacted, and even affecting, for example, the creative industry. 
In light of these issues, the unavoidable question arises as to what is the role of law in this landscape. 
 
Obs.: a avaliação da versão produzida pelo candidato levará em consideração a variação lexical, tanto decorrente de sinonímia 
quanto de variantes diatópicas (regionais) da língua, assim como as diferentes possibilidades tradutórias igualmente válidas, 
desde que respeitados os aspectos de fidelidade ao texto-fonte; respeito à qualidade e ao registro do texto-fonte; e correção 
morfossintática e lexical. 
 
Considerando-se que, conforme previsão editalícia, a Prova Escrita de Língua Inglesa era constituída por dois exercícios ― 
uma redação (70,00 pontos) e uma versão (30,00 pontos) ― e  considerando-se, ainda, a existência de inconsistência entre o 
comando da prova, que indicava a elaboração de um resumo, e o exercício propriamente dito, que consistia na elaboração de 
uma versão, optou-se pela anulação do exercício e a correspondente atribuição da pontuação (30,00 pontos) a todas as pessoas 
candidatas convocadas para a Segunda Fase.   
 
 
